[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Welcome back.
I'm your host, Dr.
Robert J. Gilbert.
In this episode, we will
explore the patterns
behind some of our deepest
longings, our greatest
pleasures, and our most
profound suffering.
The sacred geometry
of relationships
holds vital keys to
how we create misery
or joy in our earthly lives.
By learning to
recognize the patterns
behind our own attempts to find
happiness with other people,
we can transform any
dysfunctional patterns
and avoid endless cycles
of unnecessary suffering.
We can find what it
is that we truly want
and need to have in our life.
Let's start with the largest
sacred geometry patterns
behind our relationships,
and then we'll
dive deep into our
very personal patterns.
Our deepest
emotional experiences
are often microcosms of great
macro cosmic principles.
In our previous episodes, we saw
how each human being descends
into a lonely isolated
individual existence
from our original state of
unity in the one, the Godhead,
the unified field state where
we are united with all that is.
We all carry within ourselves
a deep subconscious memory
of that paradise
state of being united
in the one with other beings.
We carry the longing to
return to that state of unity
or merging with another
being rather than
our lonely separate existence.
In the microcosm of
our earthly life,
this is mirrored
in our gestating
inside the body of
the mother, then
being born into a separate
isolated physical body.
Here, in our
individual existence,
we are given the gift of
free will and free choice
to develop independence.
But this requires successfully
completing the initiation
trials of loneliness
and of feeling cut off
from the rest of life.
Just as there are
angelic ranks known
to the ancient
traditions, which went
through their stage
of becoming self-aware
in previous rounds of
spiritual evolution,
so humanity is the latest
group of spiritual beings
to now go through our
self-awareness stage,
a challenging time of spiritual
adolescence full of desire,
grasping, yearning.
Our goal for this
round of evolution
is to become a spirit
of love and freedom
holding in perfect balance our
independence with our ability
to love and unite
with others as one.
This is a very high
goal, which requires
developing exquisite internal
balance, strength, and clarity.
Every one of us will
stumble multiple times
on our rocky road to
this high destination.
In the original
unity state, where
we were one with everything,
we exist in the divine plane
point, the source of
all creation, which
is in the center of
the circle or sphere
of the manifested
physical world.
Our physical life
begins with the sphere
of creation, which appears micro
cosmically as the original egg
in the mother's womb,
which, when fertilized,
splits into the
vesica piscis to start
the process of creating a
new independent multicellular
being.
This brings us to
the I Ching process
of repeated binary splits
to create our multicellular
organism, as seen in the yin
yang splitting repeatedly,
to create the hexagons of the
I Ching and our genetic code.
We end up in our own sphere,
now manifesting micro cosmically
as the amniotic
sac as we prepare
to leave the womb of
the mother and become
a separate being in the world.
Our larger cosmic process
of spiritual evolution
is that we go from
being immersed
in the one at the
divine plane level
to descending into cycles
of earthly incarnations
in order to develop independence
and, in time, to reach
our goal of becoming a
free agent in the universe.
This larger process is
mirrored in our conditions
in the black cube of physical
plane incarnation, which
are a microcosm of the macro
cosmic journey from unity
to independence.
Our time in the mother's
womb is a microcosm
of being immersed in the
unity of the divine plane.
We feel merged and
one with our mother
as we float inside a
sphere in a liquid ocean.
Immediately after
our birth, we still
feel we are part of our
mother, not a separate being.
Separation from the
mother is the primal wound
in physical life,
just as our separation
from one of the Godhead
is the primal wound
in our spiritual life.
Both experiences
are necessary for us
to evolve into our full
independent spiritual
potential.
However, that fact doesn't
negate our very real suffering
from this separation.
As we complete our
inner separation
from the mother and our family
during our adolescent years,
our inner soul life
turns to yearning
for the lost other,
our missing half,
the person who will be the
target of all of our longing
and desire.
We want to merge the sphere of
our physical separate existence
with the sphere of another,
creating the vesica piscis
form where our bodies
and energy fields
partially merge into one.
Note that, in this overlapping
of our sphere with the sphere
of another, each person
then has half of themselves
merged in the union
with the other
inside the vesica portal
and half remaining outside
and independent with
their own inner life.
This is the pattern in the
divine mind of our being
a spirit of love and freedom.
Our love is in the
central vesica of union
with another, our freedom in
the outer part of our sphere.
It is also the pattern
of the key principle
that our life sphere
is divided into being
half devoted to our own needs
and our inner development.
That's the outer
part of our sphere.
And the other half
of the sphere is
devoted to loving
service to other people
where we focus on their
needs within the vesica
of loving union.
There are many vital
keys to understanding
the sacred geometry
of relationships
and our own deep yearning and
striving for the other who
we feel will complete us.
The first key is that, while
the divine plane is about unity,
a non-physical plane
where everything literally
inter penetrates and merges,
all physical existence
is the exact opposite.
It's all about
duality, separation,
so that the physical
plane becomes
our sealed alchemical
chamber in space and time
for us to go through
an alchemical change,
a spiritual development
process in our earthly life.
The split of unity into
duality is the foundation
of the polarities of positive
and negative poles that
provide energy and
movement, such as
in the magnetic and electrical
systems on the physical plane.
In biological systems,
the polarity split
becomes male and female genders,
which are then drawn together
through tremendously powerful
subconscious energy attractions
to unite and bring
forth children to bring
new life into the world.
Even in couples of
the same gender,
powerful complementary polarity
dynamics are still in play.
Ancient traditions knew
that this polarity split
and the resulting
attraction between opposites
to unite and return
to the center
is the origin of all change,
all movement, and life itself.
The macro cosmic primal
polarity yin yang split
is reflected micro cosmically
in the male female split.
In the Indian Vedic
system, this is
seen as Shiva,
ultimate consciousness,
united with Shakti,
ultimate energy.
The cosmic yin and
yang energies which
allow our individual
spirit core to manifest
as a child on the physical
plane manifest micro cosmically
through our mother and father.
The very beginning of modern
psychology in the 1800s
focused on the psychological
effects of our early childhood
years.
The psychological foundation for
all relationships in our life
is our primal relationship
to our mother and father.
These primal connections form
our personality, our strengths,
and our weaknesses, our
neuroses, and the hidden drives
in our lives.
Examining our
relationship patterns
with our parents
and family is one
of the first steps for the
psychological self-help inner
work which every person
must do in order for us
not to become trapped in our
own childhood conditioning.
Whatever we felt we needed and
did not receive from our mother
and father and family
becomes key inner conflicts
and neuroses in our lives
until we illuminate them
with consciousness and
dissolve these inner conflicts.
At the most
fundamental level, we
keep trying to recreate
our core traumas,
casting the people
we meet in our life
into roles in our
own psychodrama.
The biggest roles for us to cast
in our subconscious psychodrama
are the bad mommy and bad daddy.
Once we have given someone
that role, of course
without informing
them of this, we
can then form a
relationship with them
and then fight with them
to endlessly recreate
our childhood traumas
with the subconscious hope
that maybe this time it
will turn out differently
and we'll now get what
it was we needed before.
In reality, this
dysfunctional casting
of people into roles
in our own psychodrama
rarely results in our
getting what we need.
With neither ourselves
nor the other person
being clear what's happening,
why we're behaving this way,
we end up in a power
struggle for who
will dominate the other.
We seek to punish our stand-in
for bad mommy or bad daddy
whenever they do not play
the role which we have
subconsciously assigned them.
This punishment can range from
our being passive aggressive,
meaning that we
are energetically
hostile while pretending on
the surface to be reasonable,
to escalating with
aggressive insults
and humiliation to outright
physical brutality.
Of course, this can never result
in the love which we really
seek.
It only destroys
whatever love was
present at the beginning
of the relationship.
When we survey so many
relationships between people,
we see again and again how
many people drawn together
in the hope of love actually
end up hurting and, in the end,
even hating each other.
So illuminating our
mommy daddy issues
while dismissed by some today
as a cliche is, in fact,
the unavoidable foundation of
clearing the path for true love
and connection in our lives.
This is because our
physical mother and father
are the microcosmic reflections
in our lives of the two
great polarities, yin
and yang, on which
our physical
incarnation is based.
They are the primal
relationships
which form the templates
for our adult life, guiding
how we try to get our hidden
psychological, emotional,
and sexual needs met.
Also, very importantly,
from these early years,
we start to create
our patterns regarding
what we will associate
with pleasure and pain.
These associations will move
us towards either success
or failure, happiness
or misery in life.
In modern times, the field of
Neurolinguistic Programming,
or NLP for short,
has created a science
of how we can change our
own lives for the better
by becoming conscious of our
pain, pleasure associations.
This is extremely
powerful because we
will seek to do whatever
we associate pleasure with
and we will avoid whatever
we associate pain with.
These associations are
often set in place randomly
and subconsciously in our
youth, rather than our choosing
them, so that we can consciously
create our optimal future.
Having the wrong
pleasure associations
can create disaster
for ourselves
or for how we treat others.
Addicts associate pleasure
with their addiction and pain
with living without
the addiction,
so they continue
their addiction.
A person with a healthier
psychology associates
pain with addiction and how it
limits and corrupts their life
and associates pleasure
with a full life
free of addictive compulsions.
We may become overweight when
we associate pleasure with food,
often as a balm for our
emotional traumas or needs,
and associating pain with
exercise or more conscious food
selection.
We need to be clear that this
core driving force of pain
and pleasure is psychological
and is not the same
as physical pleasure or pain.
It's all a matter
of our associations.
The power of our pain
and pleasure associations
to pull us towards a future
of happiness or misery
has led to the increased
availability of information
on how we can change
these associations to help
to create our optimal future.
A major aspect of core spiritual
development for each of us
is to examine the
patterns we ourselves
have created regarding our
subconscious associations
with what we think of as
pleasurable or painful.
As long as a person finds
a dysfunctional behavior,
like addiction, pleasurable,
they will have great difficulty
in changing that pattern.
By changing the association of
the activity to being painful,
it actually becomes
easy to change.
There's nothing to
struggle against.
That's why, in the
early days of NLP,
the quick results from these
life-changing techniques
were often referred to as magic.
However, do be aware
that methods like these
can be used for good or for ill.
Some NLP practitioners have
chosen to use the methods
not to help make people
aware of their own patterns,
so that they can change them
to something more beneficial,
but instead they use the
methods to manipulate people
subconsciously to do what
the practitioner desires
them to do.
This has become
very common today
where NLP techniques are
used to manipulate people
to buy products, to guide public
opinion through the media,
to support particular
political agendas,
to manipulate a person into a
sexual relationship, et cetera.
This primal driving force of
seeking pleasure and avoiding
pain is complicated in our
earthly lives by trauma.
Just as we seek to recreate the
conditions of our primal wounds
with our parents by
choosing partners
who are similar to our parents,
whether that be by withholding
affection, being undependable,
alcoholic, depressed,
judgmental,
narcissistic, abusive,
or any other
characteristic, so we also
keep subconsciously recreating
all of our key traumas.
This can be seen with small
children who have their dolls
and stuffed animals talk
and interact with each other
to play out the same traumas
they're trying to cope
with in their own lives.
We've all created
subconscious patterns
of how we respond to
trauma and danger.
Everyone has heard of the
fight or flight response.
Do we attack the source of
danger, or do we flee from it?
However, it's now being
recognized in psychology
that there's more to
it with, at minimum,
two polarity pairs of survival
patterns that we might create.
The first polarity
is fight or appease.
Do we choose the
aggressive polarity
and fight against
the danger, or do we
choose the passive polarity and
try to appease the aggressor so
that they don't harm us?
In your relationships when your
partner is being difficult,
which option do you tend
to choose most often,
to fight them or
to appease them?
Is that the same
option you choose
when you're in conflict
with the police officer
or in a conflict
with an employer?
Do you have anger
that, when you've
had to appease a person who
is in a superior position,
that you then take
your frustration out
with the opposite fight
response on someone weaker?
This is very common.
If we don't fight or
appease, we might instead
be in the second polarity
of freeze or flight.
Do we freeze up in the
face of danger and trauma
or do we literally run from it?
This can be a literal
freezing immobile or running
away as fast as we can.
Or it can be adapted to
common social situations.
So for example,
freezing can be being
shocked into silence
and immobility
in the midst of a difficult
relationship situation.
Or flight can be our having
the pattern of physically
leaving any difficult situation
immediately rather than talking
it through and dealing with it.
Note that there is no
one set superior option
in these polarities.
Different situations call for
different optimal responses.
In some extreme
situations, fighting
will get you killed and
appeasing will assure survival,
whereas, in other situations,
fighting will save your life
and appeasing will
get you killed.
So the issue is which patterns
we have subconsciously adopted
and whether we have developed
through inner freedom
to choose whatever response
is optimal in a particular
situation rather than
staying stuck in one
rigid subconscious pattern.
Rather than these
extreme polarities,
more balanced responses
are possible when
we are fully present
and empowered, when
we are able to think clearly
and rationally in the situation
rather than being
overwhelmed and defaulting
to our subconscious programming.
These patterns of how we respond
to others through our childhood
conditioning and our traumas
are not simply abstract patterns
in our consciousness.
They absolutely manifest as
distorted sacred geometry
patterns in our
own energy field.
Barbara Brennan popularized
models of the human energy
field structures, which
healers will often
encounter in her books
such as "Hands Of Light."
Inner psychological states,
such as masochistic, schizoid,
hysteric, et cetera, manifest
from the mental and emotional
subtle bodies into the vitality
body with these distortions.
Our energy field can mirror
our emotional and mental trauma
states with creating
sharp projections outward
to fend other people off
the way a porcupine does.
Or we can have a collapse of
energy around parts of the body
or have the physical body
become off-center and imbalanced
in the energy field or
many other variations.
Our psychological
states can also then
manifest from our vitality
body, our energy field,
into visible distortions
in the physical body.
One very simple, yet profound,
physical manifestation
of our trauma was identified
by psychologist Wilhelm Reich.
Reich did pioneering
research in the early 1900s
regarding how we somatize
trauma and we repress
forbidden feelings,
including sexual energies,
which we are not allowed to
express in a healthy way.
It was Reich who, in fact,
started the entire field
of modern mind-body
therapies where
we can work with
the physical body
to address deeper emotional
and mental issues.
Reich's clinical work found
that when a person suppressed
their natural life energy
from trauma or from societal
repression of free expression
this leads to subconsciously
restrict our breath so that
the energy in our body cannot
pulsate naturally.
It also leads us to hold
very tight and rigid
those areas of the body
where unacceptable emotions
or needs are felt.
Reich called this
chronic life energy
suppressing tension
in the body armoring.
He identified multiple
areas of the body
where people commonly
hold tight, armored,
in order to suppress various
types of memories, feelings,
or expressions.
For example, thoughts which
we feel we cannot express
or painful events we do not want
to remember or think about lead
to chronic tension in the
muscles around the forehead
and the eye areas.
Reich noted that
ocular armoring, which
is tension held around the
eyes, is tremendously widespread
today and can be
easily seen in many,
if not most, modern people.
Holding back things we
need to say and express
leads to armoring around
the jaw and the throat.
Suppressing painful
emotions leads
to armoring around
the chest, the heart,
and the solar plexus.
Suppressing life energy in
general and sexual feelings
in particular leads to armoring
around the muscles of the lower
abdomen and genitals
and retracting
the pelvis backwards.
One of the most
remarkable things
about armoring in the body
is that it becomes so chronic
that we don't even
know we're doing it.
Armoring becomes
our background state
that we just think of as normal,
and we might subconsciously
feel that we will be too
vulnerable or exposed if we
do not armor.
For example, we
might not associate
the psychological
and emotional tension
being held in our
forehead, in our neck
and shoulders with our
constant headaches,
brain fog, et cetera.
Or we might not associate the
tension we hold in the pelvis
to our stomach problems, to our
chronic constipation or colon
issues, to our reproductive
system dysfunctions,
to unnatural growths
in our internal organs
from the suppression of life
energy pulsation, et cetera.
Along with the development
of mind-body therapies
to free up our life energy and
neurolinguistic programming
to identify our
pain/pleasure associations
and to transform them, another
important modern development
was what became known as
transactional analysis.
Transactional analysis
means examining interactions
between people, the patterns
we create in our relationships.
It looks at how
our sense of self
is operating, whether
we are held back
at the stage of
acting like a child,
or do we act like a parent?
Or optimally, do we finally
learn how to become an adult?
Transactional analysis
also developed
the idea of life scripts,
how we internalize rules
from our environment to create
our own narrative about what
our life is about, who
we are, and all the rules
we have made for our lives.
What are your subconscious
rules about what
you need to be happy?
Is it large amounts of
money, material possessions,
social status, the love of a
particular specific individual?
Did you make a rule
that your happiness
depends on particular actions
by other people, people
who you will never be able to
control, people who are flawed
and struggling in their
own lives, who are highly
unlikely to be dependable in the
actions which you require them
to take in order
for you to be happy?
What are your rules
for what makes
a relationship successful?
Is it that it lasts forever
and is never changing?
If so, you're setting
yourself up for failure
and suffering because
people evolve and change.
Or did you make a rule that
a relationship was successful
if it created beautiful
moments, if it woke something up
in you and the other
person, if it helped you
both on your path
when it was right
and you separated lovingly
and without anger or hurt
when it had run its course?
Which set of rules do you think
is more likely to bring you
peace and happiness?
Relationships are not static.
Like everything alive,
they are dynamic.
And they must change and
evolve just as the people
in the relationship do.
Today, it is common
to see people
in intimate relationships
argue and blame their partner
for their own
unhappiness, saying things
like, you changed, as if change
is not permitted or healthy,
or saying, you promised me you
would do a particular thing
forever when the
other person is now
a very different person than
they were when they made
that promise years previously.
We have to understand
that no one can honestly
promise how they will feel
in any future situation.
We can be honest about
how we feel right now,
but we're lying
to ourselves if we
think we can commit to a feeling
that our future self will have
or even a perspective
on our relationship
that our future self will have.
Most of us can think back
to a time in our adolescence
when we were desperately madly
in love with another person.
We wanted a love
relationship with them
that would last forever.
When that relationship ended
or never came to fruition,
we felt like this was
the worst thing that
has ever happened
to any being ever
in the history of the world.
We felt like all of
our hopes and dreams
were crushed, that our suffering
was beyond measure, perhaps
leading to days,
months, sometimes
even years of depression
and inner collapse.
However, looking back
on it years later,
we often think, thank god I
didn't end up with that person.
What a catastrophe
that would have been.
I dodged a bullet.
To really understand the
range of relationships
we can create in
our lives, we have
to understand that
we are dynamically
evolving multidimensional
beings living on multiple planes
simultaneously.
We carry a portion of each of
the seven planes inside of us.
They are the literal
source of our subtle bodies
and our physical body.
We can create relationships
based on any of these planes,
or a particular relationship
can encompass multiple planes.
Real spiritual
development requires
that we become fully
conscious on each plane
through activating
and illuminating
our corresponding subtle
body level inside ourselves.
Forming relationships
with other people
on each level, the physical
level, the vitality level,
which is also the
source of our sexuality,
the emotional, mental,
spiritual, et cetera,
this is what helps us become
conscious of and to activate
each level within ourselves.
Relationships on all of these
levels are essential in order
for us to feel connected and
not have a lonely isolated life.
We need contact on the
physical and energy levels
through in-souled, loving
touch, which in our adult lives
can also become deep
sexual intimacy where
we exchange life energy
through our physical bodies.
We need contact on the
emotional and mental levels
so that we feel we have
people in our lives
who really know us,
who really see us,
who really understand us.
As we develop further,
our relationships
can extend into the causal
realm with an awareness
of the karmic connections
we develop with people
over multiple lifetimes
and then go even further
into spiritual
and divine levels.
It's deeply unrealistic to
think that one other person can
be our perfect optimal match
on all seven levels unchanging
forever.
The Earth is a
magical world where
we can encounter
and explore life
with a vast range of
other human beings.
We also have to understand
that we are being deeply unfair
to any person we get into a
relationship with who we then
saddle with the burden of
requiring them to provide all
of our connection
needs on all levels.
This just sets them
up for failure,
for disappointing us because
they're living their own life,
too.
They're not here just to play
an assigned role in our script.
We simply have to ask
ourselves, are we a match
with the other person?
If so, on what levels?
Is what I need and have
to offer a match for what
this person needs
and has to offer
on a particular level, whether
it be sexual, emotional,
mental, spiritual?
That one change in our
thoughts about relationships,
to see clearly whether or
not we are simply a match,
can make a huge contribution
to our replacing suffering
in our life with happiness.
All the anger and
resentment and blaming
we carry from
intimate relationships
can be released and
replaced with simply seeing
if it's a match or
not with no need
to assign blame or make
one person the villain
and the other person a victim.
As the old saying goes, the
only constant in life is change.
So what was once a match
with another person
at a particular level may end.
It's also possible
the relationship can
transform so that the two people
now match on a different level.
Many of our monogamous
relationships
are initially based on sexual
attraction and connection.
But in reality, for
most people, this
is the level that falls
away the most quickly.
When we connect at
the divine level,
we experience the true
nature of the term namaste,
the divine in me sees and
recognizes the divine in you.
At that stage, we can
truly merge into one.
A healthy relationship is based
on truly seeing and loving
the spiritual individuality
of our partner,
supporting them in their
dynamic evolution and growth
even if that path takes
them away from us.
The sacred geometry
of relationships
is one of the most profound
topics for our personal growth
and happiness,
which we've barely
scraped the surface of here.
For deeper applications
of the sacred geometry
of relationships
in our own lives,
please see my online
resources at www.vesica.org.
I'd like to leave you
with one final note.
Rather than the gloom
and doom we're constantly
faced with in our
world today, we
can instead choose to create a
bright future with new energy
sciences like cymatics,
vibrational radiesthesia,
and biogeometry.
I'm your host, Dr.
Robert J. Gilbert.
Thank you so much for
joining me for this series.
It's been my great privilege
to explore with you
the secrets of Sacred Geometry.